  WE ARE AT REST five miles behind the front. Yesterday we were relieved, and now our bellies are full of
beef and haricot beans. We are satisfied and at peace. Each man has another mess-tin full for the evening;
 and, what is more, there is a double ration of sausage and bread. That puts a man in fine trim. We have not
  had such luck as this for a long time. The cook with his carroty head is begging us to eat; he beckons with
   his ladle to every one that passes, and spoons him out a great dollop. He does not see how he can empty his
    stew-pot in time for coffee. Tjaden and Müller have produced two washbasins and had them filled up to the
     brim as a reserve. In Tjaden this is voracity, in Müller it is foresight. Where Tjaden puts it all is a mystery,
      for he is and always will be as thin as a rake.

  What’s more important still is the issue of a double ration of smokes. Ten cigars, twenty cigarettes, and
   two quids of chew per man; now that is decent. I have exchanged my chewing tobacco with Katczinsky for
    his cigarettes, which means I have forty altogether. That’s enough for a day.
 It is true we have no right to this windfall. The Prussian is not so generous. We have only a miscalculation
  to thank for it.

  Fourteen days ago we had to go up and relieve the front line. It was fairly quiet on our sector, so the
   quartermaster who remained in the rear had requisitioned the usual quantity of rations and provided for
    the full company of one hundred and fifty men. But on the last day an astonishing number of English
     heavies opened up on us with high-explosive, drumming ceaselessly on our position, so that we suffered
      severely and came back only eighty strong.

  Last night we moved back and settled down to get a good sleep for once: Katczinsky is right when he says
   it would not be such a bad war if only one could get a little more sleep. In the line we have had next to none,
    and fourteen days is a long time at one stretch.

  It was noon before the first of us crawled out of our quarters. Half an hour later every man had his mess-
  tin and we gathered at the cook-house, which smelt greasy and nourishing. At the head of the queue of
   course were the hungriest—little Albert Kropp, the clearest thinker among us and therefore only a lance-
   corporal; Müller, who still carries his school textbooks with him, dreams of examinations, and during a
    bombardment mutters propositions in physics; Leer, who wears a full beard and has a preference for the
     girls from officers’ brothels. He swears that they are obliged by an army order to wear silk chemises and to
      bathe before entertaining guests of the rank of captain and upwards. And as the fourth, myself, Paul
       Bäumer. All four are nineteen years of age, and all four joined up from the same class as volunteers for the
        war.

  Close behind us were our friends: Tjaden, a skinny locksmith of our own age, the biggest eater of the
   company. He sits down to eat as thin as a grasshopper and gets up as big as a bug in the family way; Haie
    Westhus, of the same age, a peat-digger, who can easily hold a ration-loaf in his hand and say: Guess what
     I’ve got in my fist; then Detering, a peasant, who thinks of nothing but his farm-yard and his wife; and
      finally Stanislaus Katczinsky, the leader of our group, shrewd, cunning, and hard-bitten, forty years of age,
       with a face of the soil, blue eyes, bent shoulders, and a remarkable nose for dirty weather, good food, and
        soft jobs.

  Our gang formed the head of the queue before the cookhouse. We were growing impatient, for the cook
   paid no attention to us

  Finally Katczinsky called to him: “Say, Heinrich, open up the soup-kitchen. Anyone can see the beans are
   done.”

  He shook his head sleepily: “You must all be there first.” Tjaden grinned: “We are all here.”

  The sergeant-cook still took no notice. “That may do for you,” he said. “But where are the others?”

  “They won’t be fed by you to-day. They’re either in the dressing-station or pushing up daisies.”

  The cook was quite disconcerted as the facts dawned on him. He was staggered. “And I have cooked for
   one hundred and fifty men——”

  Kropp poked him in the ribs. “Then for once we’ll have enough. Come on, begin!”

  Suddenly a vision came over Tjaden. His sharp, mousy features began to shine, his eyes grew small with
   cunning, his jaws twitched, and he whispered hoarsely: “Man! then you’ve got bread for one hundred and
    fifty men too, eh?”

  The sergeant-cook nodded absent-minded, and bewildered.

  Tjaden seized him by the tunic. “And sausage?”

  Ginger nodded again.

  Tjaden’s chaps quivered. “Tobacco too?”

  “Yes, everything.”

  Tjaden beamed: “What a bean-feast! That’s all for us! Each man gets—wait a bit—yes, practically two
   issues.”

  Then Ginger stirred himself and said: “That won’t do.”

  We got excited and began to crowd around.

  “Why won’t that do, you old carrot?” demanded Katczinsky.

  “Eighty men can’t have what is meant for a hundred and fifty.”

  “We’ll soon show you,” growled Müller.

  “I don’t care about the stew, but I can only issue rations for eighty men,” persisted Ginger.

  Katczinsky got angry. “You might be generous for once. You haven’t drawn food for eighty men. You’ve
   drawn it for the Second Company. Good. Let’s have it then. We are the Second Company.”

  We began to jostle the fellow. No one felt kindly toward him, for it was his fault that the food often came
   up to us in the line too late and cold. Under shellfire he wouldn’t bring his kitchen up near enough, so that
    our soup-carriers had to go much farther than those of the other companies. Now Bulcke of the First
     Company is a much better fellow. He is as fat as a hamster in winter, but he trundl
es his pots when it comes to that right up to the very front-line.

  We were in just the right mood, and there would certainly have been a dust-up if our company commander
   had not appeared. He informed himself of the dispute, and only remarked: “Yes, we did have heavy losses
    yesterday.”

  He glanced into the dixie. “The beans look good.”

  Ginger nodded. “Cooked with meat and fat.”

  The lieutenant looked at us. He knew what we were thinking. And he knew many other things too, because
   he came to the company as a non-com. and was promoted from the ranks. He lifted the lid from the dixie
    again and sniffed. Then passing on he said: “Bring me a plate full. Serve out all the rations. We can do with
     them.”

  Ginger looked sheepish as Tjaden danced round him.

  It doesn’t cost you anything! Anyone would think the quartermaster’s store belonged to him! And now get
   on with you, you old blubber-sticker, and don’t you miscount either.”

  “You be hanged!” spat out Ginger. When things get beyond him he throws up the sponge altogether; he
   just goes to pieces. And as if to show that all things were equal to him, of his own free will he issued in
    addition half a pound of synthetic honey to each man.

  To-day is wonderfully good. The mail has come, and almost every man has a few letters and papers. We
   stroll over to the meadow behind the billets. Kropp has the round lid of a margarine tub under his arm.

  On the right side of the meadow a large common latrine has been built, a roofed and durable construction.
   But that is for recruits who as yet have not learned how to make the most of whatever comes their way. We
    want something better. Scattered about everywhere there are separate, individual boxes for the same
     purpose. They are square, neat boxes with wooden sides all round, and have unimpeachably satisfactory
      seats. On the sides are hand grips enabling one to shift them about.

  We move three together in a ring and sit down comfortably. And it will be two hours before we get up
   again.

  I well remember how embarrassed we were as recruits in barracks when we had to use the general latrine.
   There were no doors and twenty men sat side by side as in a railway carriage, so that they could be reviewed
    all at one glance, for soldiers must always be under supervision.

  Since then we have learned better than to be shy about such trifling immodesties. In time things far worse
   than that came easy to us.

  Here in the open air though, the business is entirely a pleasure. I no longer understand why we should
   always have shied at these things before. They are, in fact, just as natural as eating and drinking. We might
    perhaps have paid no particular attention to them had they not figured so large in our experience, nor been
     such novelties to our minds—to the old hands they had long been a mere matter of course.

  The soldier is on friendlier terms than other men with his stomach and intestines. Three-quarters of his
   vocabulary is derived from these regions, and they give an intimate flavour to expressions of his greatest joy
    as well as of his deepest indignation. It is impossible to express oneself in any other way so clearly and
     pithily. Our families and our teachers will be shocked when we go home, but here it is the universal
      language.

  Enforced publicity has in our eyes restored the character of complete innocence to all these things. More
   than that, they are so much a matter of course that their comfortable performance is fully as much enjoyed
   as the playing of a safe top running flush. Not for nothing was the word “latrine-rumour” invented; these
    places are the regimental gossip-shop and common-rooms.

  We feel ourselves for the time being better off than in any palatial white-tiled “convenience.” There it can
   only be hygienic; here it is beautiful.

  These are wonderfully care-free hours. Over us is the blue sky. On the horizon float the bright yellow,
   sunlit observation-balloons, and the many little white clouds of the anti-aircraft shells. Often they rise in a
    sheaf as they follow after an airman. We hear the muffled rumble of the front only as very distant thunder,
     bumblebees droning by quite drown it. Around us stretches the flowery meadow. The grasses sway their tall
      spears; the white butterflies flutter around and float on the soft warm wind of the late summer. We read
       letters and newspapers and smoke. We take off our caps and lay them down beside us. The wind plays with
        our hair; it plays with our words and thoughts. The three boxes stand in the midst of the glowing, red field-
        poppies.

  We set the lid of the margarine tub on our knees and so have a good table for a game of skat. Kropp has the
   cards with him. After every misère ouverte we have a round of nap. One could sit like this for ever.

  The notes of an accordion float across from the billets. Often we lay aside the cards and look about us. One
   of us will say: “Well, boys.…” Or “It was a near thing that time.…” And for a moment we fall silent. There is
    in each of us a feeling of constraint. We are all sensible of it; it needs no words to communicate it. It might
     easily have happened that we should not be sitting here on our boxes to-day; it came damn near to that.
      And so everything is new and brave, red poppies and good food, cigarettes and summer breeze.

  Kropp asks: “Anyone seen Kemmerich lately?”

  “He’s up at St. Joseph’s,” I tell him.

  Müller explains that he has a flesh wound in his thigh; a good blighty.

  We decide to go and see him this afternoon.

  Kropp pulls out a letter. “Kantorek sends you all his best wishes.”

  We laugh. Müller throws his cigarette away and says: “I wish he was here.”

  Kantorek had been our schoolmaster, a stern little man in a grey tail-coat, with a face like a shrew mouse.
   He was about the same size as Corporal Himmelstoss, the “terror of Klosterberg.” It is very queer that the
    unhappiness of the world is so often brought on by small men. They are so much more energetic and
     uncompromising than the big fellows. I have always taken good care to keep out of sections with small
      company commanders. They are mostly confounded little martinets.

  During drill-time Kantorek gave us long lectures until the whole of our class went, under his shepherding,
   to the District Commandant and volunteered. I can see him now, as he used to glare at us through his
    spectacles and say in a moving voice: “Won’t you join up, Comrades?”

  These teachers always carry their feelings ready in their waistcoat pockets, and trot them out by the hour.
   But we didn’t think of that then.

  There was, indeed, one of us who hesitated and did not want to fall into line. That was Joseph Behm,
   a plump, homely fellow. But he did allow himself to be persuaded, otherwise he would have been ostracized.
    And perhaps more of us thought as he did, but no one could very well stand out, because at that time even
     one’s parents were ready with the word “coward”; no one had the vaguest idea what we were in for. The
      wisest were just the poor and simple people. They knew the war to be a misfortune, whereas those who
       were better off, and should have been able to see more clearly what the consequences would be, were beside
        themselves with joy.

  Katczinsky said that was a result of their upbringing. It made them stupid. And what Kat said, he had
   thought about.

  Strange to say, Behm was one of the first to fall. He got hit in the eye during an attack, and we left him
   lying for dead. We couldn’t bring him with us, because we had to come back helter-skelter. In the afternoon
    suddenly we heard him call, and saw him crawling about in No Man’s Land. He had only been knocked
     unconscious. Because he could not see, and was mad with pain, he failed to keep under cover, and so was
     shot down before anyone could go and fetch him in.

  Naturally we couldn’t blame Kantorek for this. Where would the world be if one brought every man to
   book? There were thousands of Kantoreks, all of whom were convinced that they were acting for the best—
   in a way that cost them nothing.

  And that is why they let us down so badly.

  For us lads of eighteen they ought to have been mediators and guides to the world of maturity, the world
   of work, of duty, of culture, of progress—to the future. We often made fun of them and played jokes
    on them, but in our hearts we trusted
them. The idea of authority, which they represented, was associated in our minds with a greater insight and
 a more humane wisdom. But the first death we saw shattered this belief. We had to recognize that our
  generation was more to be trusted than theirs. They surpassed us only in phrases and in cleverness. The
   first bombardment showed us our mistake, and under it the world as they had taught it to us broke in
   pieces.

  While they continued to write and talk, we saw the wounded and dying. While they taught that duty to
  one’s country is the greatest thing, we already knew that death-throes are stronger. But for all that we were
  no mutineers, no deserters, no cowards—they were very free with all these expressions. We loved our
   country as much as they; we went courageously into every action; but also we distinguished the false from
    true, we had suddenly learned to see. And we saw that there was nothing of their world left. We were all at
     once terribly alone; and alone we must see it through.

  Before going over to see Kemmerich we pack up his things: he will need them on the way back.

  In the dressing station there is great activity: it reeks as ever of carbolic, pus, and sweat. We are
   accustomed to a good deal in the billets, but this makes us feel faint. We ask for Kemmerich. He lies in a
    large room and receives us with feeble expressions of joy and helpless agitation. While he was unconscious
     someone had stolen his watch.

  Müller shakes his head: “I always told you that nobody should carry as good a watch as that.”

  Müller is rather crude and tactless, otherwise he would hold his tongue, for anybody can see that
   Kemmerich will never come out of this place again. Whether he finds his watch or not will make no
    difference, at the most one will only be able to send it to his people.

  “How goes it, Franz?” asks Kropp.

  Kemmerich’s head sinks.

  “Not so bad … but I have such a damned pain in my foot.”

  We look at his bed covering. His leg lies under a wire basket. The bed covering arches over it. I kick Müller
   on the shin, for he is just about to tell Kemmerich what the orderlies told us outside: that Kemmerich has
    lost his foot. The leg is amputated. He looks ghastly, yellow and wan. In his face there are already the
     strained lines that we know so well, we have seen them now hundreds of times. They are not so much lines
      as marks. Under the skin the life no longer pulses, it has already pressed out the boundaries of the body.
       Death is working through from within. It already has command in the eyes. Here lies our comrade,
       Kemmerich, who a little while ago was roasting horse flesh with us and squatting in the shell-holes. He it is
        still and yet it is not he any longer. His features have become uncertain and faint, like a photographic plate
         from which two pictures have been taken. Even his voice sounds like ashes.

I think of the time when he went away. His mother, a good plump matron, brought him to the station. She
 wept continually, her face was bloated and swollen. Kemmerich felt embarrassed, for she was the least
  composed of all; she simply dissolved into fat and water. Then she caught sight of me and took hold of my
   arm again and again, and implored me to look after Franz out there. Indeed he did have a face like a child,
    and such frail bones that after four weeks’ pack-carrying he already had flat feet. But how can a man look
     after anyone in the field!

  “Now you will soon be going home,” says Kropp. “You would have had to wait at least three or four months
   for your leave.”

  Kemmerich nods. I cannot bear to look at his hands, they are like wax. Under the nails is the dirt of the
   trenches, it shows through blue-black like poison. It strikes me that these nails will continue to grow like
    lean fantastic cellar-plants long after Kemmerich breathes no more. I see the picture before me. They twist
     themselves into corkscrews and grow and grow, and with them the hair on the decaying skull, just like grass
      in a good soil, just like grass, how can it be possible——

  Müller leans over. “We have brought your things, Franz.”

  Kemmerich signs with his hands. “Put them under the bed.”

  Müller does so. Kemmerich starts on again about the watch. How can one calm him without making him suspicious?

  Müller reappears with a pair of airman’s boots. They are fine English boots of soft, yellow leather which
   reach to the knees and lace up all the way—they are things to be coveted.

  Müller is delighted at the sight of them. He matches their soles against his own clumsy boots and says:
  “Will you be taking them with you then, Franz?”

  We all three have the same thought; even if he should get better, he would be able to use only one—they
   are no use to him. But as things are now it is a pity that they should stay here; the orderlies will of course
    grab them as soon as he is dead.

“Won’t you leave them with us?” Müller repeats.

  Kemmerich doesn’t want to. They are his most prized possessions.

  “Well, we could exchange,” suggests Müller again. “Out here one can make some use of them.” Still
   Kemmerich is not to be moved.

  I tread on Müller’s foot; reluctantly he puts the fine boots back again under the bed.

  We talk a little more and then take our leave.

  “Cheerio, Franz.”

  I promise him to come back in the morning. Müller talks of doing so, too. He is thinking of the lace-up
   boots and means to be on the spot.

  Kemmerich groans. He is feverish. We get hold of an orderly outside and ask him to give Kemmerich a
   dose of morphia.

  He refuses. “If we were to give morphia to everyone we would have to have tubs full——”

  “You only attend to officers properly,” says Kropp viciously.

  I hastily intervene and give him a cigarette. He takes it.

  “Are you usually allowed to give it, then?” I ask him.

  He is annoyed. “If you don’t think so, then why do you ask?”

   I press a few more cigarettes into his hand. “Do us the favour——”

    “Well, all right,” he says.

    Kropp goes in with him. He doesn’t trust him and wants to see. We wait outside.

    Müller returns to the subject of the boots. “They would fit me perfectly. In these boots I get blister after
     blister. Do you think he will last till tomorrow after drill? If he passes out in the night, we know where the
      boots——”

    Kropp returns. “Do you think——?” he asks.

    “Done for,” said Müller emphatically.

    We go back to the huts. I think of the letter that I must write to-morrow to Kemmerich’s mother. I am
     freezing. I could do with a tot of rum. Müller pulls up some grass and chews it. Suddenly little Kropp throws
      his cigarette away, stamps on it savagely, and looking around him with a broken and distracted face,
      stammers “Damned shit, the damned shit!”

    We walk on for a long time. Kropp has calmed himself; we understand, he saw red; out there every man
     gets like that sometime.

    “What has Kantorek written to you?” Müller asks him.

    He laughs. “We are the Iron Youth.”

    We all three smile bitterly, Kropp rails: he is glad that he can speak.

    Yes, that’s the way they think, these hundred thousand Kantoreks! Iron Youth! Youth! We are none of us
     more than twenty years old. But young? Youth? That is long ago. We are old folk.

 IT IS STRANGE to think that at home in the drawer of my writing table there lies the beginning of a play
  called “Saul” and a bundle of poems. Many an evening I have worked over them—we all did something of
   the kind—but that has become so unreal to me I cannot comprehend it any more. Our early life is cut off
    from the moment we came here, and that without our lifting a hand. We often try to look back on it and to
     find an explanation, but never quite succeed. For us young men of twenty everything is extraordinarily
      vague, for Kropp, Müller, Leer, and for me, for all of us whom Kantorek calls the “Iron Youth.” All the older
       men are linked up with their previous life. They have wives, children, occupations, and interests, they have
        a background which is so strong that the war cannot obliterate it. We young men of twenty, however, have
         only our parents, and some, perhaps, a girl—that is not much, for at our age the influence of parents is at its
          weakest and girls have not yet got a hold over us. Besides this there was little else—some enthusiasm, a few
           hobbies, and our school. Beyond this our life did not extend. And of this nothing remains.

   Kantorek would say that we stood on the threshold of life. And so it would seem. We had as yet taken no
    root. The war swept us away. For the others, the older men, it is but an interruption. They are able to think
     beyond it. We, however, have been gripped by it and do not know what the end may be. We know only that
     in some strange and melancholy way we have become a waste land. All the same, we are not often sad.

   Though Müller would be delighted to have Kemmerich’s boots, he is really quite as sympathetic as another
    who could not bear to think of such a thing for grief. He merely sees things clearly. Were Kemmerich able to
     make any use of the boots, then Müller would rather go bare-foot over barbed wire than scheme how to get
      hold of them. But as it is the boots are quite inappropriate to Kemmerich’s circumstances, whereas Müller
       can make good use of them. Kemmerich will die; it is immaterial who gets them. Why, then, should Müller
        not succeed to them? He has more right than a hospital orderly. When Kemmerich is dead it will be too
         late. Therefore Müller is already on the watch.

   We have lost all sense of other considerations, because they are artificial. Only the facts are real and
    important for us. And good boots are scarce.

   Once it was different. When we went to the district commandant to enlist, we were a class of twenty young
    men, many of whom proudly shaved for the first time before going to the barracks. We had no definite
     plans for our future. Our thoughts of a career and occupation were as yet of too unpractical a character to
      furnish any scheme of life. We were still crammed full of vague ideas which gave to life, and to the war also
       an ideal and almost romantic character. We were trained in the army for ten weeks and in this time more
        profoundly influenced than by ten years at school. We learned that a bright button is weightier than four
         volumes of Schopenhauer. At first astonished, then embittered, and finally indifferent, we recognized that
          what matters is not the mind but the boot brush, not intelligence but the system, not freedom but drill. We
           became soldiers with eagerness and enthusiasm, but they have done everything to knock that out of us.
            After three weeks it was no longer incomprehensible to us that a braided postman should have more
             authority over us than had formerly our parents, our teachers, and the whole gamut of culture from Plato to
              Goethe. With our young, awakened eyes we saw that the classical conception of the Fatherland held by our
               teachers resolved itself here into a renunciation of personality such as one would not ask of the meanest
                servants—salutes, springing to attention, parade-marches, presenting a
 rms, right wheel, left wheel, clicking the heels, insults, and a thousand pettifogging details. We had fancied
  our task would be different, only to find we were to be trained for heroism as though we were circus-ponies.
   But we soon accustomed ourselves to it. We learned in fact that some of these things were necessary, but
    the rest merely show. Soldiers have a fine nose for such distinctions.

   By threes and fours our class was scattered over the platoons amongst Frisian fishermen, peasants, and
    labourers with whom we soon made friends. Kropp, Müller, Kemmerich, and I went to No. 9 platoon under
     Corporal Himmelstoss.

   He had the reputation of being the strictest disciplinarian in the camp, and was proud of it. He was a small
    undersized fellow with a foxy, waxed moustache, who had seen twelve years’ service and was in civil life a
     postman. He had a special dislike of Kropp, Tjaden, Westhus, and me, because he sensed a quiet defiance.

   I have remade his bed fourteen times in one morning. Each time he had some fault to find and pulled it to
    pieces. I have kneaded a pair of prehistoric boots that were as hard as iron for twenty hours—with intervals
     of course—until they became as soft as butter and not even Himmelstoss could find anything more to do to
      them; under his orders I have scrubbed out the Corporals’ Mess with a tooth-brush. Kropp and I were given
       the job of clearing the barrack-square of snow with a hand-broom and a dust-pan, and we would have gone
        on till we were frozen had not a lieutenant accidentally appeared who sent us off, and hauled Himmelstoss
         over the coals. But the only result of this was to make Himmelstoss hate us more. For six weeks
          consecutively I did guard every Sunday and was hut-orderly for the same length of time. With a full pack
           and rifle I have had to practise on a wet, soft, newly-ploughed field the “Prepare to advance, advance!” and
            the “Lie down!” until I was one lump of mud and finally collapsed. Four hours later I had to report to
             Himmelstoss with my clothes scrubbed clean, my hands chafed and bleeding. Together with Kropp,
              Westhus, and Tjaden I have stood at attention in a hard frost without gloves for a quarter of an hour at a
               stretch, while Himmelstoss watched for the slightest movement of our bare fingers on the steel barrel of the
                rifle. I have run eight times from the top floor of the barracks down to the courtyard in my shirt at two
                 o’clock in the morning because my drawers projected three inches beyond the edge of the stool on which
                  one had to stack all one’s things. Alongside me ran the corporal, Himmelstoss, and trod on my bare toes. At
                   bayonet-practice I had constantly to fight with Himmelstoss, I with a heavy iron weapon, whilst he had a
                    handy wooden one with which he easily struck my arms till they were black and blue. Once, indeed, I
                     became so infuriated that I ran at him blindly and gave him a mighty jab in the stomach and knocked him
                      down. When he reported me the company commander laughed at him and told him he ought to keep his
                       eyes open; he understood Himmelstoss, and apparently was not displeased at his discomfiture. I became a
                        past master on the parallel bars and excelled at physical jerks;—we have trembled at the mere sound of his
                         voice, but his runaway post-horse never got the better of us.

   One Sunday as Kropp and I were lugging a latrine-bucket on a pole across the barrack-yard, Himmelstoss
    came by, all polished up and spry for going out. He planted himself in front of us and asked how we liked
     the job. In spite of ourselves we tripped and emptied the bucket over his legs. He raved, but the limit had
      been reached.

   “That means clink,” he yelled.

   But Kropp had had enough. “There’ll be an inquiry first,” he said, “and then we’ll unload.”

   “Mind how you speak to a non-commissioned officer!” bawled Himmelstoss. “Have you lost your senses?
    You wait till you’re spoken to. What will you do, anyway?”

   “Show you up, Corporal,” said Kropp, his thumbs in line with the seams of his trousers.

   Himmelstoss saw that we meant it and went off without saying a word. But before he disappeared he
    growled: “You’ll drink this!”—but that was the end of his authority. He tried it on once more in the
     ploughed field with his “Prepare to advance, advance” and “Lie down.” We obeyed each order, since an
      order’s an order and has to be obeyed. But we did it so slowly that Himmelstoss became desperate.
       Carefully we went down on our knees, then on our hands, and so on; in the meantime, quite infuriated, he
        had given another command. But before we had even begun to sweat he was hoarse. After that he left us in
         peace. He did indeed always refer to us as swine, but there was, nevertheless, a certain respect in his tone.

   There were many other staff corporals, the majority of whom were more decent. But above all each of
    them wanted to keep his good job there as long as possible, and this he could do only by being strict with
     the recruits.

   So we were put through every conceivable refinement of parade-ground soldiering till we often howled
    with rage. Many of us became ill through it; Wolf actually died of inflammation of the lung. But we would
     have felt ridiculous had we hauled down our colours. We became hard, suspicious, pitiless, vicious, tough—
     and that was good; for these attributes were just what we lacked. Had we gone into the trenches without
      this period of training most of us would certainly have gone mad. Only thus were we prepared for what
       awaited us. We did not break down, but adapted ourselves; our twenty years, which made many another
        thing so grievous, helped us in this. But by far the most important result was that it awakened in us a
         strong, practical sense of esprit de corps, which in the field developed into the finest thing that arose out of
          the war—comradeship.

   I sit by Kemmerich’s bed. He is sinking steadily. Around us is great commotion. A hospital train has
    arrived and the wounded fit to be moved are being selected. The doctor passes by Kemmerich’s bed without
     once looking at him.

   “Next time, Franz,” I say.

   He raises himself on the pillow with his elbows. “They have amputated my leg.”

   He knows it too then. I nod and answer: “You must be thankful you’ve come off with that.”

   He is silent.

   I resume: “It might have been both legs, Franz. Wegeler has lost his right arm. That’s much worse.
    Besides, you will be going home.” He looks at me. “Do you think so?”

   “Of course.”

   “Do you think so?” he repeats.

   “Sure, Franz. Once you’ve got over the operation.”

   He beckons me to bend down. I stoop over him and he whispers: “I don’t think so.”

   “Don’t talk rubbish; Franz, in a couple of days you’ll see for yourself. What is it anyway—an amputated
    leg? Here they patch up far worse things than that.”

   He lifts one hand. “Look here though, these fingers.”

   “That’s the result of the operation. Just eat decently and you’ll soon be well again. Do they look after you
    properly?”

   He points to a dish that is still half full. I get excited. “Franz, you must eat. Eating is the main thing. That
    looks good too.”

   He turns away. After a pause he says slowly: “I wanted to become a head-forester once.”

   “So you may still,” I assure him. “There are splendid artificial limbs now, you’d hardly know there was
    anything missing. They are fixed on to the muscles. You can move the fingers and work and even write with
     an artificial hand. And besides, they will always be making new improvements.”

   For a while he lies still. Then he says: “You can take my lace-up boots with you for Müller.”

   I nod and wonder what to say to encourage him. His lips have fallen away, his mouth has become larger,
    his teeth stick out and look as though they were made of chalk. The flesh melts, the forehead bulges more
     prominently, the cheekbones protrude. The skeleton is working itself through. The eyes are already sunken
      in. In a couple of hours it will be over.

   He is not the first that I have seen thus; but we grew up together and that always makes it a bit different. I
    have copied his essays. At school he used to wear a brown coat with a belt and shiny sleeves. He was the
     only one of us, too, who could do the giant’s turn on the horizontal bar. His hair flew in his face like silk
      when he did it. Kantorek was proud of him. But he couldn’t stand
 cigarettes. His skin was very white; he had something of the girl about him.

   I glance at my boots. They are big and clumsy, the breeches are tucked into them, and standing up one
    looks well-built and powerful in these great drainpipes. But when we go bathing and strip, suddenly we
     have slender legs again and slight shoulders. We are no longer soldiers but little more than boys; no one
      would believe that we could carry packs. It is a strange moment when we stand naked; then we become
       civilians, and almost feel ourselves to be so. When bathing Franz Kemmerich looked as slight and frail as a
        child. There he lies now—but why? The whole world ought to pass by this bed and say: “That is Franz
         Kemmerich, nineteen and a half years old, he doesn’t want to die. Let him not die!”

   My thoughts become confused. This atmosphere of carbolic and gangrene clogs the lungs, it is a thick
    gruel, it suffocates.

   It grows dark. Kemmerich’s face changes colour, it lifts from the pillow and is so pale that it gleams. The
    mouth moves slightly. I draw near to him. He whispers: “If you find my watch, send it home——”

   I do not reply. It is no use any more. No one can console him. I am wretched with helplessness. This
    forehead with its hollow temples, this mouth that now seems all teeth, this sharp nose! And the fat, weeping
     woman at home to whom I must write. If only the letter were sent off already!